A SYNOPSIS ON

TITLE

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award of the degree of

BACHELOR 

IN

COMPUTER APPLICATION (BCA)
Submitted by:

Soumalya Bagchi	TNU2023069100024
Priyam Halder	TNU2023069100009
Ankit Gore	TNU2023069100003
Dipankar Pramanik	TNU2023069100051
Sukanta Mandal	TNU2023069100046

Under the Guidance of

Proff. Sandipan Chakravorty
Designation




 


Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Neotia University
Diamond Harbour Road, Sarisha, 24 Parganas (s), Kolkata, 
West Bengal 743368 

April-2026

 

CANDIDATE’S DECLARATION

I hereby certify that the work which is being presented in the Synopsis entitled “Smart Pharmacy Inventory & Expiry Management System” in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the award of the Degree of Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of The Neotia University, Kolkata shall be carried out by the undersigned under the supervision of Sandipan Chakravorty, Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Neotia University, Kolkata.

	Soumalya Bagchi 		TNU2023069100024			
	Priyam Halder		TNU2023069100009			
	Ankit Gore			TNU2023069100003			
	Dipankar Pramanik		TNU2023069100051			
	Sukanta Mandal		TNU2023069100046

The above mentioned students shall be working under the supervision of the undersigned on the “SMART PHARMACY INVENTORY & EXPIRY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM”

         Signature 								 Signature
       Supervisor						            Head of the Department

Internal Evaluation (By DPRC Committee)

Status of the Synopsis:  Accepted / Rejected 
Any Comments: 



Name of the Committee Members:				 Signature with Date
1.
2.		

Table of Contents

Chapter No.	Description	Page No.
Chapter 1	Introduction and Problem Statement	
Chapter 2	Background/ Literature Survey	
Chapter 3	Objectives	
Chapter 4	Hardware and Software Requirements	
Chapter 5	Possible Approach/ Algorithms	
	References	












Chapter 1
Introduction and Problem Statement
1.1	Introduction
In recent years, the healthcare and pharmaceutical sectors have witnessed significant growth, leading to an increased demand for efficient inventory management systems in local pharmacy stores. Despite this growth, many small and medium-sized pharmacies still rely on manual or semi-digital methods to manage their medicine inventory. These traditional methods are often inefficient, error-prone, and lack real-time monitoring capabilities.
Medicines are sensitive products with defined expiry dates and batch numbers, making their management more complex compared to general retail items. Improper handling of inventory can lead to issues such as stockouts, overstocking, and financial losses due to expired medicines. Additionally, the absence of intelligent systems results in poor tracking of near-expiry products and missed opportunities for timely returns to distributors.
Modern technologies such as barcode scanning, Optical Character Recognition (OCR), and data analytics provide an opportunity to transform traditional pharmacy management systems into smart, automated platforms. By integrating these technologies, pharmacies can improve operational efficiency, reduce wastage, and enhance decision-making.
This project proposes the development of a Smart Pharmacy Inventory & Expiry Management System that integrates inventory tracking, billing, expiry alerts, return management, and analytics into a unified system tailored for local pharmacy stores.

1.2	Problem Statement
Local pharmacy stores face significant challenges in managing medicine inventory due to reliance on manual or basic digital systems. These challenges include:
•	Inefficient tracking of medicine stock and batch details 
•	Lack of timely identification of near-expiry medicines 
•	Financial losses due to missed return deadlines 
•	Absence of intelligent decision-making tools for stock optimization 
•	Errors in manual data entry and stock updates 
•	No analytical insights into sales trends and inventory performance 
Therefore, there is a need for an intelligent, automated system that can efficiently manage pharmacy inventory, minimize losses due to expiry, and support data-driven decision-making.

Chapter 2
Background/ Literature Survey 
1.	Importance of Inventory Management in Pharmacy Sector
Inventory management plays a crucial role in the pharmaceutical industry due to the time-sensitive and regulated nature of medicines. Proper stock handling ensures availability of essential drugs while minimizing losses due to expiry and overstocking. 
2.	Limitations of Traditional Pharmacy Systems
Most local pharmacy stores still rely on manual registers or basic billing software. These systems are limited to transaction recording and lack advanced features such as batch tracking, expiry monitoring, and intelligent stock management. 
3.	Challenges in Handling Expiry-Sensitive Products
Medicines have fixed expiry dates, making their management more complex than general retail items. Inefficient tracking often leads to expired stock, financial loss, and potential health risks if not handled properly. 
4.	Need for Batch-wise Inventory Tracking
Research highlights the importance of batch-level tracking in pharmaceutical inventory systems. Batch tracking allows precise monitoring of expiry dates, return eligibility, and stock movement, which is often missing in small-scale systems. 
5.	Use of Barcode Technology in Inventory Systems
Barcode scanning has been widely adopted to improve data accuracy and speed in inventory entry. It reduces human errors and enables quick identification of medicines. However, not all medicines in local stores have barcodes, limiting its effectiveness. 
6.	Application of Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
Recent advancements in OCR technology allow automatic extraction of text from medicine packaging. This helps in identifying medicine names, batch numbers, and expiry dates, providing a useful alternative where barcode scanning is not feasible. 
7.	Role of Database Management Systems
Modern inventory systems use relational databases such as MySQL or PostgreSQL to store and manage large volumes of data efficiently. These systems ensure data consistency, quick retrieval, and better organization of inventory records. 
8.	Use of Analytics in Inventory Optimization
Advanced systems incorporate data analytics to identify fast-moving and slow-moving medicines. This helps in optimizing stock levels, reducing dead stock, and improving overall operational efficiency. 
9.	Gap in Existing Systems for Local Pharmacies
Most advanced pharmacy management systems are designed for large chains and hospitals. They are often expensive and complex, making them unsuitable for small local pharmacy stores that require simple yet effective solutions. 
10.	Need for an Integrated Smart System
There is a clear need for a cost-effective, user-friendly system that integrates inventory management, expiry tracking, return optimization, and analytics. Such a system can significantly improve efficiency and reduce wastage in local pharmacy operations.















Chapter 3
Objectives
The main objectives of the proposed Smart Pharmacy Inventory & Expiry Management System are as follows:
1.	To develop an efficient batch-wise inventory management system
The system aims to maintain a structured database of medicines with detailed batch-level information such as batch number, expiry date, quantity, and MRP. This will enable accurate tracking of stock and ensure proper implementation of First-In-First-Out (FIFO) methodology for better inventory control. 
2.	To implement a smart and flexible inventory entry mechanism
The system will support multiple methods for adding medicines, including barcode scanning, Optical Character Recognition (OCR)-based image processing, and manual entry with auto-suggestions. This ensures ease of use and accommodates medicines that do not have barcodes. 
3.	To design an automated near-expiry detection and alert system
The objective is to continuously monitor medicine expiry dates and generate timely alerts categorized into warning and critical levels. This will help pharmacists take proactive actions such as prioritizing sales or initiating returns to reduce wastage. 
4.	To develop an integrated billing and sales management system
The system will generate digital bills and automatically update inventory in real time during each transaction. It will also maintain sales records, ensuring accuracy and reducing manual errors in stock deduction. 
5.	To implement an efficient return management system
The system will identify medicines eligible for return based on expiry timelines and generate return lists automatically. It will also track return status and credit notes, helping pharmacies minimize financial losses due to expired stock. 
6.	To provide an analytics dashboard for data-driven decision making
The system will analyse sales and inventory data to identify fast-moving and slow-moving medicines, detect dead stock, and evaluate financial performance. This will assist pharmacy owners in making informed decisions regarding stock management and purchasing.



Chapter 4
Hardware and Software Requirements
Hardware Requirements
•	Computer system with minimum 4GB RAM 
•	Barcode scanner (optional) 
•	Smartphone camera (for OCR scanning) 
•	Storage device 
Software Requirements
•	Operating System: Windows / Linux 
•	Programming Language: Java / Python / JavaScript 
•	Database: MySQL / PostgreSQL 
•	Frameworks: Web or Mobile development frameworks 
•	Tools: OCR libraries, barcode scanning libraries











Chapter 5
Possible Approach/ Algorithms  
 (2 to 4 pages)
Proposed Approach
5.1 Proposed Approach
The proposed system follows a modular and systematic approach to manage pharmacy inventory efficiently. The system integrates multiple functional components that work together with a centralized database to ensure accuracy, automation, and real-time updates.
The overall workflow of the system is divided into the following stages:
Step 1: Inventory Entry
The first step involves adding medicines into the system. The system supports multiple input methods to ensure flexibility and usability in real-world scenarios.
•	Medicines can be added using barcode scanning for quick identification. 
•	For medicines without barcodes, Optical Character Recognition (OCR) can extract information from packaging. 
•	Manual entry with auto-suggestions is also provided to minimize typing effort and errors. 
•	Each entry stores detailed batch information including batch number, expiry date, quantity, and price. 
This hybrid approach ensures that the system is adaptable to different types of pharmacy environments.
Step 2: Inventory Management
Once medicines are added, the system maintains a structured database of all inventory records.
•	Medicines are tracked batch-wise rather than as a single quantity. 
•	Each batch is associated with its expiry date and quantity. 
•	The system ensures proper organization of stock using First-In-First-Out (FIFO) principles. 
•	Storage conditions such as normal or refrigerated can also be managed. 
This approach improves accuracy in tracking and reduces the chances of expiry-related losses.
Step 3: Billing and Sales Management
The billing module handles customer transactions and ensures automatic updates in inventory.
•	Bills are generated digitally for each sale. 
•	When a medicine is sold, the system automatically deducts the quantity from the corresponding batch. 
•	FIFO logic is applied to ensure that medicines with earlier expiry dates are sold first. 
•	Sales records are stored for future analysis. 
This eliminates manual errors and ensures consistency between sales and inventory.
Step 4: Near-Expiry Detection
The system continuously monitors the expiry dates of all medicines in the inventory.
•	The current date is compared with the expiry date of each batch. 
•	Medicines are categorized based on remaining shelf life: 
o	Critical: Expiring within 30 days 
o	Warning: Expiring within 90 days 
•	Alerts are generated and displayed to the user. 
This helps pharmacists take timely actions and prevent stock wastage.
Step 5: Return Management
The return management module is designed to minimize losses by identifying medicines eligible for return.
•	The system checks if a batch falls within the return window (typically 3–6 months before expiry). 
•	Eligible medicines are automatically added to a return list. 
•	The system tracks the status of returns such as pending or completed. 
•	Credit notes or replacements from distributors can also be recorded. 
This ensures efficient handling of near-expiry stock.
Step 6: Analytics Dashboard
The analytics module provides insights based on collected data.
•	Sales data is analyzed to identify fast-moving and slow-moving medicines. 
•	Inventory data is used to detect dead stock and near-expiry items. 
•	Financial analysis helps track revenue and losses due to expiry. 
•	Visual representations such as charts and summaries improve decision-making. 
This enables pharmacy owners to make data-driven decisions.
5.2 Algorithms Used

5.2.1 FIFO-Based Stock Handling Algorithm
The FIFO algorithm ensures that medicines with the earliest expiry dates are sold first, reducing wastage.
Steps:
1.	Retrieve all batches of a medicine. 
2.	Sort batches in ascending order of expiry date. 
3.	Select the batch with the earliest expiry. 
4.	Deduct the required quantity from that batch. 
5.	If the quantity is insufficient, move to the next batch. 
6.	Repeat until the required quantity is fulfilled. Pseudo Code:
Input: Medicine_ID, Quantity_Required

Fetch all batches of the medicine
Sort batches by Expiry_Date (ascending)

For each batch:
    If batch_quantity >= Quantity_Required:
        batch_quantity -= Quantity_Required
        break
    Else:
        Quantity_Required -= batch_quantity
        batch_quantity = 0

Update inventory


5.2.2 Near-Expiry Detection Algorithm
This algorithm identifies medicines approaching expiry.
Steps:
1.	Get the current system date. 
2.	For each batch, calculate remaining days. 
3.	Classify based on threshold values. 
Pseudo Code:
For each batch:
    days_left = Expiry_Date - Current_Date

    If days_left <= 30:
        status = "Critical"
    Else if days_left <= 90:
        status = "Warning"
    Else:
        status = "Safe"

5.2.3 Return Eligibility Algorithm
This algorithm determines whether a medicine is eligible for return.
Steps:
1.	Define return window (e.g., 90–180 days before expiry). 
2.	Calculate remaining days for each batch. 
3.	Mark eligible batches. 
Pseudo Code:
For each batch:
    days_left = Expiry_Date - Current_Date

    If days_left >= 90 AND days_left <= 180:
        mark as "Return Eligible"

5.2.4 Sales Trend Analysis Algorithm
This algorithm categorizes medicines based on demand.
Steps:
1.	Calculate total sales for each medicine. 
2.	Compare with predefined thresholds. 
3.	Classify accordingly. 
Pseudo Code:
For each medicine:
    sales_count = total units sold

    If sales_count > threshold_high:
        category = "Fast Moving"
    Else:
        category = "Slow Moving"


5.2.5 Dead Stock Detection Algorithm
This algorithm identifies inventory that is not being sold.
Steps:
1.	Track last sale date for each medicine. 
2.	Calculate inactivity period. 
3.	Mark as dead stock if no sale within a threshold (e.g., 60 days). 

5.3 Advantages of the Proposed Approach
•	Reduces losses due to expired medicines 
•	Improves inventory accuracy and efficiency 
•	Automates routine tasks such as billing and tracking 
•	Supports better decision-making through analytics 
•	Provides a scalable solution for local pharmacy stores 





























 





























References 

Journal Papers
[1] N. K. Kanhere and S. T. Birchfield, “Real-time incremental segmentation and tracking of vehicles at low camera angles using stable features,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 148–160, 2008.
[2] S. Axsäter, “Inventory control theory: A review,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 93–94, pp. 1–12, 2005.
[3] A. Rossetti and S. Achlerkar, “Inventory management issues in healthcare systems,” International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 305–320, 2011.
[4] P. DeHoratius and A. Raman, “Inventory record inaccuracy: An empirical analysis,” Management Science, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 627–641, 2008.

Conference Papers
[5] K. Onoguchi, “Moving object detection using a cross correlation between a short accumulated histogram and a long accumulated histogram,” Proceedings of the International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2006.
[6] M. Li, Z. Zhang, and Y. Chen, “Automated inventory management using barcode and RFID technologies,” International Conference on Information Management, 2018.

Books
[7] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, 2nd ed., MIT Press, 2001.
[8] R. S. Pressman, Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2010.
[9] K. Laudon and J. Laudon, Management Information Systems, 15th ed., Pearson, 2018.

Web Resources
[10] Open Source Computer Vision Library (OpenCV), “OCR and Image Processing Documentation.” [Online]. Available: http://opencv.org
[11] World Health Organization (WHO), “Guidelines on good pharmacy practice.” [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int
[12] MySQL Documentation, “Database Management System Guide.” [Online]. Available: https://dev.mysql.com
[13] Google ML Kit, “Text Recognition (OCR) API.” [Online]. Available: https://developers.google.com/ml-kit

